 SIR PHILIP HARTOG: Would Mr. Gandhi explain why the literacy figure was fourteen per cent of the men and only two per cent of the women, and why illiteracy was higher to Kashmir and Hyderabad than in British India. Mr. Gandhi replied that the women's education had been neglected, to the shame of the men. He could only conjecture, with regard to the figures for Kashmir, that if illiteracy was greater there, it was due to the negligence of the ruler or because the population was predominantly, Mohammedan, but he thought that, as a matter of fact, it was six of the one and half a dozen of the other. Q. Were the Brahmins in Congress helping the untouchables? If so, why was it necessary to dig wells for the untouchables? Could they not use the Brahmin wells? Was it not the Salvation Army and the missionaries who did most of the work among the untouchables? Mr. Gandhi replied that he had given the reason why the untouchables could not use the Brahmin wells when he said it was the curse of Hinduism. If all the Brahmins had been reformed there would be no difficulty, but the majority of the workers engaged in digging wells and performing other services for the untouchables were themselves Brahmins, who considered they were doing some measure of penance for the suffering which their fellow castemen had imposed on the untouchables . The work of the Salvation Army and the missionaries was of a different character from that done by the Hindu reformers, and he did not wish to go into that issue on that occasion. Q. What effect would the proposed reforms have on the population of India ? If better hygiene was introduced, it would lower the death rate and increase the population, and if a better standard of living was attained through individual industry and economy of public expenditure, was there anything which would hold back the birth rate from again rising to keep the population hard up against subsistence level? Was not permanent improvement prevented without restriction of the birth rate? Mr. Gandhi replied that this problem was not a monopoly of India; it was a modern superstition. He did not regard a normal increase in birth rate as an evil, and he would congratulate the Congress workers if they could show that, as a result of their hygienic and other reforms, the birth rate of India had increased. He was not afraid of an increase of poverty if the birth rate did increase. They were trying to inculcate among themselves the kind of life which regarded a normal increase in birth rate as one thing and animal indulgence resulting in birth rate as another, and there could not be too much stress laid upon education of that character. He had undertaken a prayerful study of the question and was in correspondence with Western thinkers all over Europe and America on the subject, and he had come definitely to the conclusion that the methods of birth control suggested by modern reformers would be found upon experience to have been death traps.