 The following letter 1 has been lying with me for a long time: In the mean time, I visited Ahmedabad. I did not have the occasion to express my views on the above subject. But, as mentioned by the correspondent, I certainly believe that birth control can be made effective only through self control. Any other means of birth control is likely to result in harm. One can easily discern the evil effects of artificial birth control methods where they have taken root. It is not surprising that those who advocate birth control without abstention cannot see these, as it has gained footing in the name of morality. It is an exaggeration to say that the object of the committee formed in Ahmedabad is what the correspondent states it to be. But whatever its aim may be, its activities will definitely result in an increase in sexual indulgence. Water when thrown on the ground is bound to follow a downward course; similarly, if means are invented to facilitate sexual indulgence, it is bound to increase. Similarly, it is an exaggeration to believe that doctors and vaidyas do not preach self restraint as it is likely to affect their incomes adversely. Doctors and vaidyas have never considered it their field to advocate self restraint. But I see clear signs of these men tending more and more to do so. Their field is to diagnose diseases and cure them. If they do not assign primary importance to indulgence and lack of self restraint as a cause of disease, a time will come when they will have to stop their practice. As society becomes increasingly intelligent, it will not rest satisfied unless diseases are completely eradicated. And, so long as society does not turn towards self restraint and does not observe the rules to prevent diseases, it is impossible for it to remain healthy. This is so clear that ultimately everyone will be able to see it and honest doctors will give it the utmost importance. I have no doubt that birth control without self control will contribute largely towards increase in sexual indulgence. Hence, it is my humble opinion that the Ahmedabad League can obtain the desired results if it goes deeper into the problem and, taking into account the dangerous consequences of lack of self 